---
title: Andy Matuschak on Dwarkesh podcast
tags:
  - notes
date: 2024-08-09
---

Source: https://www.dwarkeshpatel.com/p/andy-matuschak

### Highlights

- when people are interested and it connects to something that's truly meaningful for them, they really do want to absorb and we see that in their behavior.
- The claim, maybe this is an optimistic claim, you can take me to task, is that there is such a thing as being a more skillful reader and being a more skillful reader will actually, in practice, in many cases, when the reading is aligned with your actual interests, produce a more serious, more understanding, forward kind of reading.
- Adler and Van Doren suggest that the first and most important rule of skillful reading, active reading, is asking questions and trying to answer them. If you just dwell on that, what kinds of questions should I be asking and how should I go about asking them? How should I go about answering them when the author isn't present?
- undemanding reader asks no questions and gets no answers.
- One enduring result in education psychology is that when you're doing a lot of cognition, metacognition is difficult. What I mean by that is when you're thinking really hard about the stuff on the page, it's very difficult for you to plan, to regulate yourself, to figure out what the best next action to do is, to reflect and evaluate on whether you're understanding things.
- There's been a bunch of research on adjunct questions, questions that go along with a text, and they have all kinds of effects. The adjunct questions have the kind of effects on forward material I was just describing and they also have the effect of making you reflect on what you've just learned. And in addition to the questions being asked, you might find yourself pondering, “_Well, I'm being asked about this. But why does this matter?_”
- I think a very common mistake that people make is to feel that they need to do the thing the right way and that is exhaustive and completionist. If they fail because they find themselves bored or unmotivated because the material doesn't actually seem to relate to what they want to know, but they're just going on faith that, “*Well, if I follow what the author says, everything will be good.”* Anyway, they find themselves having trouble for that reason, and then they just stop. This is bad. They would be better off just skipping around according to their interest and continuing.
- Syllabi as scaffolds. The scaffolding is ubiquitous in education. We give you simpler versions of questions first, that's a kind of scaffolding. We partially work the answer first, that's a kind of scaffolding. We give you worked examples first, where we might ask you to predict the next step of the work example.
- one of the prominent theories of cognition, that is how we come to know and learn things, is this theory called [ACT-R](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ACT-R) by John Anderson. A key part of it is this process that he calls knowledge compilation. This is the process by which we take individual facts and turn them into higher level patterns that we can generalize and apply in more contexts. And I think that's what Paul is gesturing at. By reading a book which contains a story or a case study you learn to generalize to some extent and you apply it in other contexts when it seems relevant.
- in order to effectively compile things that you've learned into schemas that will match feature scenarios effectively, you need to be exposed repeatedly to those things, you need to use them, you need to do a variety of things that will basically show your brain that is relevant to apply these things in combination. And simply reading probably won't do that. But if you read and you have a lot of conversations and you're in a context where it's demanding and it's drawing on what you read, then you may naturally do that kind of compilation step.
- DP: do LLMs make memorization more or less valuable? There's a case you can make for both. But on net, is it more important to have more Anki cards in your deck now that GPT-4 is out?
  - I just want to make the case that so much of what you do and experience day to day is memory bound, or is memory influenced in important ways. For instance, your ability to understand a difficult argument, even in the course of a text, is memory bound. Some of that's working memory. But your ability to understand an argument that has many steps in it, more steps than you can keep in your working memory, depends on your ability to think of some of those steps in terms of some stuff that you already know, so that you can kind of reduce it or abstract it.
- Early on in my time in Khan Academy I learned a whole lot of details about the education market in a very thorough way using memory systems. This let me be in high level executive kinds of conversations where we're trying to figure out strategy stuff and somebody would propose a particular direction and I could say things like, “*Well the total budget spending for instructional materials is this and that market is growing by this percent per year and 10% of students in the US are in this place”* and so on and so forth. Basically I could evaluate ideas on the fly in a way that others couldn’t.
- One of the things that I think is kind of weird about this memory system stuff, or like memory champions, or something like that is “*Oh, if you do these things, will you start to forget other normal human stuff?”* And what's weird is, no. I've been doing this memory system stuff for years and I just know more stuff now. This is aligned with the experimental literature, which seems to suggest that, there's probably upper bounds but we're not close to them. Some of these memory champions have memorized maybe two orders of magnitude more things than I have practiced. Certainly people who are multi-lingual have really, really absurd numbers of things memorized. So there isn't a resource management argument.
- One of the theories about how well we remember stuff in what circumstances is actually called predictive utility theory. And it suggests that the probability of retrieval of a particular item in a given situation actually does correspond with basically a model of to what extent the brain predicts it will be useful.
- I'd already built just tons of stuff for Apple's platform. I had to learn a lot of stuff. I learned a ton of stuff about the internals of those systems. But because I already had such a rich understanding, both of Apple's platforms and of computer science and engineering in general, I had this really rich network for stuff to slot into. Learning stuff is easier when you have other stuff to connect to. It's a nice principle.
- Metacognitive load on me was lighter because others were figuring out what we should be doing. Just like by contrast, now I'm doing research, I'm trying to discover things that are not known. I'm trying to make things that didn't exist. The hard questions that I answer are mostly, what should be done or what should I do? And that question is not just a technical one of how I should implement this feature that needs to get built, but what intervention on a reader should be taken? That requires synthesizing lots of different unfamiliar literature.
- But I want to make the case that there is a kind of pocket that you can fall into. Maybe you call it flow where the demandingness that you're bringing to bear is matched to your ability, the book is not overwhelming, you feel like you can make your way through it, and this is actually more engaging. I occasionally will find myself reading as an undemanding reader and finding my attention kind of slipping because I'm just not that attached to the text emotionally, I'm kind of reading dutifully, I'm like trying to get through it. That sometimes produces an adversarial aspect where the text is in my way or it's kind of something to be accomplished. And often I will find that I need to bring more gumption to bear to power through and make myself sit there and keep flipping the pages than I need if I actually just open my curiosity and attention and really start engaging the book.
- [From Nand to Tetris](https://www.nand2tetris.org/). This is a very interesting project that's kind of along these lines. And what characterizes it, like games, is doing. It's active. So when I was asking all those questions of the book, that was active learning, active reading, Nand to Tetris is naturally active. So this is a course in which you kind of start with basically nothing. You start with memory and you build a virtual computer and build Tetris. You build a processor and stuff. The whole thing's active. The whole time you're making the computer grow. This is doing a similar job to the question asking that I was doing, except that you don't have to regulate all of that yourself. The regulation, the choice of what activity to do, is in the course, is in the structure of the material. I think some kind of mass medium that is like that is waiting to be created, but that can be applied in many, many circumstances.
- I'm actually incredibly excited about streaming as a medium for this. We're gesturing at a particular kind of learning that needs to happen. It's often called tacit knowledge. One of the things that you have to learn to do as an engineer is to learn to deal with 100,000 different weird situations where something is not behaving the right way. Eventually you learn pattern recognition, you learn ways of dealing with this. Much of this is not described in any book. It's not explicitly taught. You just learn it by doing it over a long period of time. By watching George do it, I think that people do absorb stuff. They can absorb some of that knowledge. That's part of how apprentices absorb that knowledge. There's a few things that are missing. You're not getting feedback. There's a whole lot of chaff there. There's a whole lot of stuff that probably isn't all that meaningful. It's also true for apprentices. I'm pretty excited about streaming videos. I've complained loudly that there aren't more designer streamers.
- I kind of got out of the educational space in part because I don't like the framing of this problem. For the median student, the education system mostly wants to make the student do things they don't want to do. It's not about helping them achieve their goals more easily or more effectively. For the most part, it's about achieving goals that aren't theirs
- Basically everyone in the educational space, this isn't totally true, but like 90+% of people in the educational space are focused on the bottom quartile, not even the median. And there's a good reason for this. Many people who are in education are motivated by arguments of equity and opportunity. They want everybody to have the opportunities they had. They're very motivated by the injustices that they see in the differing access and the differing support that different people have. And they're very motivated by the very real disadvantages that accrue to the bottom quartile performing students. It's also true that the marginal impact that you'll have in that student's life will be much greater, probably, than the marginal impact on say an 80th percentile performing student or so the argument goes, like that student will be fine, which is probably true.
- The histories in educational psychology that I'm most aligned with are the most robotic, authoritarian kind of histories, and also the ones that are most kind of unschooling and Montessoriesque. I really have a ton of sympathy for elements of both of these directions and there's kind of a weird synthesis of this in my head that I can't fully externalize. I guess part of what I'm saying is aspirational. It certainly is the case that I do in practice use willpower to make things happen. Just as an example of something totally contrary to everything I was saying, I use a tool called [Beeminder](https://www.beeminder.com/), which charges me if I don't do certain things. This sounds kind of military, but it's certainly more authoritarian than this kind of freewheeling butterflies kind of gesture I was making a moment ago. And I use it to make sure that I do my memory practice. Shouldn't my memory practice be so joyful? It's at the center of my research, right? It should be the most interesting, exciting part of my day, but often it's not. And so I use this to do it anyway. So there's some tension here.
- Yeah, this is really challenging. One of the heroes of the reform school movement is this philosopher named John Dewey, and he has a lovely book called [Experience and Education](https://www.amazon.com/Experience-Education-John-Dewey/dp/0684838281), sort of written near the end of his time, looking back on all of his efforts to reform schooling in a kind of unschooling-ish direction. He was never as extreme as that, but broadly looking for freedom on the child's part. And he makes this wonderful argument that because these kids don’t have a fully developed prefrontal cortex, certainly don’t have a fully developed kind of sense of self, to let them do whatever it is that their whim commands them to do in any given moment is actually not freedom, but rather is chaining them to whatever that impulse is. It makes them the subject of these tides of impulse. And I think that's a pretty compelling argument.
- I think part of the role of having Aristotle as a tutor is communicating a worldview. It's not something that would show up on a test or something that these studies would be measuring. And so having an extremely inspiring individual might actually be the important component, and inspiring is going to be highly correlated with expensive, I think.
- I guess what I'm saying is something like, if that were true, and there are like a bunch of people who are now astrophysicists or something, it's not clear to me actually that they would have been good teachers. Being a good teacher is often about empathy and effective communication and care. It's very personal. It's very intimate. You need to understand the subject but to teach a 15 year old or something, you actually don't need to understand it at a postgraduate level necessarily.
- Whole of this section on computer tools enabling iteration : https://www.dwarkeshpatel.com/i/134213434/how-computer-tools-enable-iteration
- And this comes down to the difference in aim. I'm not trying to build some kind of scalable thing for the world at this moment. I'm trying to build the idea. The prototype is an expression of the idea. Once it arrives at a good place, then maybe there can be some scalable solution. But it's not necessarily at that place. Until it's at that place, there's a lot of thinking and sketching that goes along with the building and prototyping.
- [Gwern](https://gwern.net/) is an interesting example because there's a simpler failure mode. I still routinely run into people who will tell me, “_Oh, I've really liked your work for a while. I didn't know you had a Patreon._” That's a simple failure of a certain kind of marketing on my part. Gwern actually has this even worse. I adore Gwern. I have learned so much from him. You can go to his [Patreon page](https://www.patreon.com/gwern) and he actually makes public his revenue. He makes a tiny fraction of what I do on Patreon. I think this is inappropriate. Gwern is a much more impactful researcher than I am and he has a much bigger audience than I do. The fact that they aren't converting into patrons is mostly a matter of the way that he talks about it and the way that he presents it. It's not that he needs to market more people to his webpage. I expect he has plenty of traffic and a large audience. It's much larger than mine. There are a bunch of variables about the way you talk about this membership offering. None of us really want to think about them. I've ended up at a slightly more effective part of the space, but I'm pretty sure that there's much more effective ways to do whatever it is I'm doing.
