---
title: Why CFAR didn't get farther with a "real/efficacious art of rationality"
tags:
  - notes
---
Source: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/B9kP6x5rpmuCzpfWb/comment-reply-my-low-quality-thoughts-on-why-cfar-didn-t-get

### Highlights
- My lead guess is that the barriers and tricky spots we ran into are somewhat similar to those that lots of efforts at self-help / human potential movement / etc. things have run into, and are basically **"it's easy and locally reinforcing to follow gradients toward what one might call 'guessing the student's password', and much harder and much less locally reinforcing to reason/test/whatever one's way toward a real art of rationality. Also, the process of following these gradients tends to corrupt one's ability to reason/care/build real stuff, as does assimilation into many parts of wider society."**
- But there's a thing near "self-help" that I'll be trying to dodge in later iterations of mainline-esque workshops, if there are later iterations.  I think.  If you like, you can think with some accuracy of the small workshop we're running this week, and its predecessor workshop a couple months ago, as experiments toward having a workshop where people stay outward-directed (stay focused on inquiring into outside things, or building stuff, or otherwise staring at the world outside their own heads) rather than focusing on e.g. acquiring "rationality habits" that involve a conforming of one's own habits/internal mental states with some premade plan.
- when people try to re-order their own or other peoples’ psyches based on theories of what’s useful, it’s easy to mess things up.
- So, IMO, the history of efforts at self-improvement or rationality or the human potential movement or similar is full of efforts to rewire the psyche into molds that seem like a good idea initially, and sometimes seem like a bad idea in hindsight.  And this sort of error is a bit tricky to recover from, because, if you’re changing how your mind works or how your social scene works, you are thereby messing with the faculties you’ll later need to use to evaluate the change, and to notice and recover from errors.
- Some examples of the “impure” motives I have in mind:

- In groups:

	- Participants may want to learn “rationality”/“CFAR techniques”/etc. so that they can feel cool, so others will think they’re cool, so they can be part of the group, so they can gain the favor of a “teacher” or other power structure, etc.
	- Instructor-y types may want people to think our techniques are cool so that we’ll be in positions of power/influence/control; (or so that we can think we’re cool, or so we can keep covering up some blind spot of our own by getting everyone else to have it too)
	- Organizations may want to select people who appear to have a certain sort of psyche so they can predict or control those people, and this can itself cause would-be recruits for that organization to want to appear to be that way, and so on.  (CS Lewis’s “[inner ring](https://www.lewissociety.org/innerring/)” concept covers some of this, but it can get extra wonky once you bring in explicit techniques for modeling and changing the psyche, IMO.)
- So, in summary: people's desires to control one another, or fool one another, can combine poorly with techniques for psychological self- or other- modification.  So, too, with people's desires to control their own psyches, or to fool themselves, or to dodge uncertainty.  Such failure modes are particularly easy because we do not have good models of how the psyche, or the sociology, ought to work, and it is relatively easy to manage to be "honestly mistaken" in convenient ways in view of that ignorance.
- In  [Something to Protect](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/SGR4GxFK7KmW7ckCB/something-to-protect) , Eliezer argues that the real power in rationality will come when it is developed for the sake of some outside thing-worth-caring-about that a person cares deeply about, rather than developed for the sake of "being very rational" or some such.
- Relatedly, in [Mandatory Secret Identities](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/gBewgmzcEiks2XdoQ/mandatory-secret-identities), Eliezer advocates requiring that teachers of rationality have a serious day job / hobby / non-rationality-teacher engagement with how to do something difficult, and that they do enough real accomplishment to warrant respect in this other domain, and that no one be respected more as a teacher of rationality than as an accomplisher of other real stuff.  That is, he suggested we try to get respect for real traction on real, non-"rationality" tasks into any rationality dojo's social incentives.
- Unfortunately, our CFAR curriculum development efforts mostly had no such strong outside mooring.  That is, CFAR units rose or fell based on e.g. how much we were personally convinced they were useful, and how much the students seemed to like them and seemed to be changed by them, how much we liked the resultant changes in our students, (both immediately and at follow-ups months or years later), etc. -- but not based (much/enough) on whether those units helped us/them/whoever make real, long-term progress on outside problems.
- It unfortunately seems to me that for most of the goals people come in with, and for most of the ways that people tend initially to evaluate whether they are making progress on that goal, the "help them feel as though they're making progress on this goal" gradient tends more like toward skill at manipulating themselves and/or others, and less like toward skill at predicting and manipulating the physical world.
- I might have hoped that “solve AI, allow human survival” would be an instance of “[something to protect](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/SGR4GxFK7KmW7ckCB/something-to-protect)” for some of us, and that our caring about AI safety would help ground/safeguard the rationality curriculum.  I.e., I might have hoped that my/our desire to have humanity survive, would lead us to want to get real rationality techniques that really work, and would lead us away from dynamics such as those in [Schools Proliferating without Evidence](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/JnKCaGcgZL4Rsep8m/schools-proliferating-without-evidence), and toward something grounded and real.
- And in addition to the paucity of data as to whether our techniques were helping with research, there was a presence of lots and lots of data and incentives as to whether our techniques were e.g. moving people to take up careers in AI safety, moving people to think we were cool, moving people to seem like they were likely to defer to MIRI or others I thought were basically good or on-path, etc.   On my model, these other incentives, and my responses to them, made my and some others' efforts worse.
- I... did _try_ to have my efforts to influence people on AI risk be based in "epistemic rationality," as I saw it.  That is, I had a model in which folks' difficulty taking AI risk seriously was downstream of gaps in their epistemic rationality, and in which it was crucial that persuasion toward AI safety work be done via improving folks' general-purpose epistemic rationality, and not through e.g. causing people to like the [disconnected phrase](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/fg9fXrHpeaDD6pEPL/truly-part-of-you) "AI safety."
- Nevertheless: the feedbacks that in-practice shaped which techniques I liked/used/taught were often feedbacks from "does this cause people to look like people who will help with AI risk as I see it, i.e. does it help with my desire for a certain ideology to be in control of people," and less feedbacks from "are they making real research progress now" or other grounded-in-the-physical-world successes/failures.
- And... my guess in hindsight is that the "internal double crux" technique often led, in practice, to people confusing/overpowering less verbal parts of their mind with more-verbal reasoning, even in cases where the more-verbal reasoning was mistaken.  For example, I once used the "internal double crux" technique with a person I will here call "Bob", who had been badly burnt out by his past attempts to do direct work on AI safety.  After our internal double crux session, Bob happily reported that he was no longer very worried about this, proceeded to go into direct AI safety work again, and... got badly burnt out by the work a year or so later.  I have a number of other stories a bit like this one (though with different people and different topics of internal disagreement) that, as a cluster, lead me to believe that "internal double crux" in practice often worked as a tool for a person to convince themselves of things they had some ulterior motive for wanting to convince themselves of.  Which... makes some sense from the feedbacks that led me to elevate the technique, independent of what I told myself I was 'trying' to do.
- Thus, AI safety did not end up serving a “reality tether” function for us, or at least not sufficiently.  (Feedbacks from "can people do research" did help in some ways, even though feedbacks from "try to be persuasive/impressive to people, or to get into a social configuration that will allow influencing their future actions" harmed in other ways.)  
- - Once you have a norm of “people in class X can solve your psychological bugs, and if it’s getting in the way of ‘the cause’ it’s probably a psychological bug”, it’s easy to also get pressure on the detailed psychology of individuals from people who are in positions of social or organizational power over them in ways that are not good.
- There are probably just lots of Goodhardt-like dynamics, whereby groups of people who are initially pursuing X may trend, over time, to pursuing "things that kind of look like X" and "things that give power/resources/control to those who seem likely to pursue things that kind of look like X" and so on.)
- IMO, large parts of “the mainstream” are also cults in the sense of “entities that restrict others’ thinking in ways that are not accurate, and that have been optimized over time for the survival of the system of thought-restrictions rather than for the good of the individual, and that make it difficult or impossible for those within these systems reason freely/well.”
- For example, academia is optimized to keep people in academia.  Also, the mainstream culture among college-educated / middle-class Americans seems to me to be optimized to keep people believing “normal” things and shunning weird/dangerous-sounding opinions and ideas, i.e. to keep people deferring to the culture of middle-class America and shunning influences that might disrupt this deferral, even in cases where this makes it hard for people to reason, to notice what they care about, or to choose freely.  More generally, it seems to me there are lots of mainstream institutions and practices that condition people against thinking freely and speaking their minds.  (cf "[reason as memetic immune disorder](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/aHaqgTNnFzD7NGLMx/reason-as-memetic-immune-disorder)" and "[moral mazes](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/yivoFJE5e9HRyjXQW/mazes-sequence-summary)").
- I bring this up partly because I suspect the "true spirit of rationality" was more alive in the rationality community of 2008-2010 than it was in the CFAR of 2018 (say), or in a lot of parts of the EA community, and I further suspect that mimicry of some mainstream practices (e.g. management practices, PR practices) is one vehicle by which the "suppression of free individual caring and reasoning and self-direction, in favor of something like allowing groups to synchronize" occurred.
- 